# Wrangling Data sourced from Databases - MongoDB

## Connect to MongoDb server
Explore the database and locate the PM2.5 air quality reading
Import data into a DataFrame and build a model

## Highlights
- Prepare Data (Connect, Explore, Import)
- Connect: Connect to MongoDB
- Explore: What is data model for MongoDB? What is semi structured data? How do you query database using pymongo?
- Import: Import query results into a DataFrame


## Libraries used 
- prettyprinter: makes formatting easier to read from database
- pymongo: used to get data from mongodb server

Data from MongoDB is given in dictionaries, pretty printer helps to ensure the layout is easier


### Libraries 
from pprint import PrettyPrinter

import pandas as pd

from IPython.display import VimeoVideo

from pymongo import MongoClient

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### PREPARE DATA - Connect

Data from MongoDB is given in dictionaries, pretty printer helps to ensure the layout is easier

- Task:  Instantiate a PrettyPrinter, and assign it to the variable pp.
pp = PrettyPrinter(indent = 2)


- Task: Create a client that connects to the database running at localhost on port 27017
client = MongoClient(host = "localhost", port=27017)


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### PREPARE DATA - Explore

Iterator: An iterator is a function that allows Python deliver a stream of data. it allows python to save on memory space
It is important for MongoDB because we want to save on memory usage

- Task: Print a list of the databases available on client.

pp.pprint(list(client.list_databases()))
We wrapped it in list as without the list function, the output produced was the memory location


------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- Task: Assign the "air-quality" database to the variable db.

db = client["air-quality"]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- Task: Use the list_collections method to print a list of the collections available in db.

for c in db.list_collections():
    print(c["name"])

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Assign the "nairobi" collection in db to the variable name nairobi

nairobi = db["nairobi"]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the count_documents method to see how many documents are in the nairobi collection.

nairobi.count_documents({})

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the find_one method to retrieve one document from the nairobi collection, and assign it to the variable name result

*NOTES*: There are 2 kinds of methods to possibly be used, find and find_one
find retrieves all documents in the collection
find_one retrieves the first document only

result = nairobi.find_one({})
pp.pprint(result)



### ANALYZE THE DATA
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the distinct method to determine how many sensor sites are included in the nairobi collection.

To find the Unique sites in the Nairobi data
nairobi.distinct("metadata.site")

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the count_documents method to determine how many readings there are for each site in the nairobi collection.

*Note*: There were two sites in this dataset: site 6 and site 29, hence the below output

print("Documents from site 6:", nairobi.count_documents({"metadata.site":6}))
print("Documents from site 29:", nairobi.count_documents({"metadata.site":29}))

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the aggregate method to determine how many readings there are for each site in the nairobi collection.

*NOTE*: In the above exercise, we counted document readings for sites 6 and 9 one at a time
If we had lots of documents, it would have been an inefficient approach
To count all documents at the same time do below
We add the dollar sign ($) to indicate to the collection that we are creating something new 

result = nairobi.aggregate(
    [
        {"$group": {"_id": "$metadata.site", "count" : {"$count" : {}}}}
    ]
)
pp.pprint(list(result))

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- Task: Use the distinct method to determine how many types of measurements have been taken in the nairobi collection.

nairobi.distinct("metadata.measurement")
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- Task: Use the find method to retrieve the PM 2.5 readings from all sites. Be sure to limit your results to 3 records only.

result = nairobi.find({"metadata.measurement":"P2"}).limit(3)
pp.pprint(list(result))
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- Task: Use the aggregate method to calculate how many readings there are for each type ("humidity", "temperature", "P2", and "P1") in site 6.

result = nairobi.aggregate(
    [
        {"$match":{"metadata.site": 6}},
        {"$group": {"_id": "$metadata.measurement", "count": {"$count": {}}}}
    ]
)
pp.pprint(list(result
))
------------------------------------------------------------------------------


- Task: Use the aggregate method to calculate how many readings there are for each type ("humidity", "temperature", "P2", and "P1") in site 29

------------------------------------------------------------------------------


- Task: Use the find method to retrieve the PM 2.5 readings from site 29. Be sure to limit your results to 3 records only. Since we won't need the metadata for our model, use the projection argument to limit the results to the "P2" and "timestamp" keys only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- Task: Read records from your result into the DataFrame df. Be sure to set the index to "timestamp".
